New post about clinics and appointments (#509)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/cohort-to-clinic/2026/05/what-we-learned-about-clinics-and-appointments/index.md

---
title: What we learned about clinics and appointments

> description: Three key learnings from our research with BSOs to better understand approaches to clinic management and appointment booking

Reviewer: Minor:
- 'key' is a redundant word that creeps into gov communication. This would read as well or better without it.
- 'better' I think that's also unnecessary here

date: 2026-05-21
tags:
  - clinics
  - appointments
  - discovery
author:
  - Kathryn Murphy-Wright
opengraphImage:
  src: /cohort-to-clinic/2026/05/what-we-learned-about-clinics-and-appointments/clinic-creation-high-level-process-v4.png
  alt: Diagram illustrating the high-level process of clinic creation, starting with defining the key details, then setting the broad schedule for the day, then the capacity becomes available in a calendar view, then finally users can zoom into a particular day to make changes to individual slots within the schedule
---

> When we formed as a team in early 2026, we decided to initially focus on clinic setup and appointment booking. One of our first steps was reviewing existing data and insights to identify gaps and decide what to explore next.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we formed as a team in early 2026, we decided to focus on clinic setup and appointment booking. One of our first steps was reviewing existing data and insights to identify gaps and decide what to explore next.  
```

We identified a need to learn more about how Breast Screening Office (BSO) staff set up clinics and schedule appointments and any challenges they face.  

> This design history shares three key findings from our research with BSOs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design history covers the three most important findings from our research with BSOs:
1. setting up clinics is a manual process
2. special appointments have to be managed manually
3. staff spend a lot of time managing rebookings
```

Something like this would help users to parse what they're reading a little easier

## What did we do?

Between March and April 2026, we visited 5 BSOs and interviewed 1 remotely to learn more about their approaches to clinic creation, management and appointment booking. 

We selected BSOs in a range of locations and serving different populations so that we could understand the different challenges they face and how this impacts the way they manage clinics and appointments. 

Where possible, we visited BSOs in person so that we could observe current processes and better understand the challenges admin staff face. 

## What did we learn?
### Setting up clinics is a manual process

> We heard from BSOs that there are multiple manual steps involved in getting clinics set up before staff can begin booking appointments.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We heard from BSOs that there are several manual steps involved in getting clinics set up before staff can begin booking appointments.  
```

> If the clinic is due to take place in a new location, first admin staff need to create a new clinic code for the location in the National Breast Screening System (NBSS). If it’s a location they’ve been to before, they have the option to reuse the clinic code from previous visits.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example – if the clinic is due to take place in a new location, admin staff need to create a new clinic code for the location in the National Breast Screening System (NBSS). 

If it’s a location they’ve been to before, they can reuse the clinic code from previous visits.  
```

Reviewer: Is this a problem – seems like a reasonable process? If that's a problem can you say more about why?

Author: Thanks Ralph, it's less of an issue but just one in a number of many manual steps required in the process

> Then BSOs need to set the broad schedule for the clinic, specifying dates, opening hours and appointment slots. These settings are repeated across each week the clinic will run.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When setting up a clinic BSOs need to set the schedule, specifying dates, opening hours and appointment slots. These settings are repeated across each week the clinic will run.  
```

> Once the broad schedule has been set and the clinic opened, this capacity becomes available in their clinic diary. Any changes to individual days or slots then need to be made manually.  

Reviewer: Can you say what a 'clinic diary' is?

> We heard from BSOs that they sometimes need to hold particular slots for things like rebookings, or to block out time for participants needing a double appointment slot. To do this, admin staff must stop individual appointment slots for each day manually. This is time-consuming and repetitive because there’s no way to apply this across multiple days if BSOs want to block slots in a regular pattern. 

Reviewer: Is 'stop' a term that BSOs use? I'm not sure I understand – does it mean blocking out appointments?

Author: Yep, it's a weird NBSS naming convention. I've updated the text to describe as blocking appointment slots and note this is known as 'stopping' slots

![Diagram illustrating the high-level process of clinic creation, starting with defining the key details, then setting the broad schedule for the day, then the capacity becomes available in a calendar view, then finally users can zoom into a particular day to make changes to individual slots within the schedule](clinic-creation-high-level-process-v4.png "High-level clinic creation process")

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Double line here – can be removed for consistency

> Reducing the amount of repetitive, manual work involved in getting clinics set up in future would save BSOs a considerable amount of time and effort.

Reviewer: Would it help the end-user too? (genuine question – just interested)

Author: In terms of screening participants? No, I don't think it would do as the participant doesn't see any of the work the admin staff do and spending less time on manual steps involved in setting up clinics wouldn't have any obvious direct bearing on participant experience.

There’s no automated way to get data about which participants need special appointments into NBSS. Instead, BSOs are reliant on GP practices responding to requests for this information in advance of screening, or participants notifying the BSO when they receive their invite. If the BSO doesn’t get this information, participants may be invited to an unsuitable appointment which could lead to them attending and not being able to be screened. 

Once BSOs are made aware that someone needs a special appointment, they can record this in NBSS, selecting from a list of reasons to indicate why the participant needs a special appointment. This information can then be used to help the BSO book them into a suitable appointment.  

Matching participants with special requirements to an appropriate appointment type and location is highly manual and time-consuming, and relies heavily on BSOs’ local knowledge and interpretation of participants’ needs. 

Managing special appointments is one of the parts of the clinics and appointments process that takes the longest so a more efficient way to do this in future would be a big help for admin staff. 

> 

Reviewer: Super interesting – would love to know what you do to reduce the stress this causes

### Staff spend a lot of time managing rebookings
BSOs invite participants to timed appointments, rather than asking participants to book their own appointment, as this generally leads to better attendance. However, we heard from BSOs that they get a lot of incoming contact from participants asking to change their appointment, which can take a lot of time to manage.  

> While there isn’t currently a national service to support participants to reschedule their appointments online, two of the BSOs we visited had built their own web rebooking solutions. These offer participants a convenient web interface for asking to change their appointment, while helping reduce some of the time staff spend handling phone calls. However, staff still have to process these requests manually, with details being received by email and admin staff then needing to go into NBSS and manually change the participant’s appointment.   

Reviewer: Again – super interesting – would really like to read more about this. Seems like such strong evidence of how user needs are being met at the front-line

Author: Definitely! It's interesting to see how BSOs plug the gaps where central provisions falls down by building their own DIY solutions. Says a lot about needs!

A more automated system for allowing participants to reschedule their appointments online in future would make a big impact for BSOs, helping to reduce some of the time and effort admin staff currently spend on managing rebookings.

## What's next?

> Visiting and speaking with BSOs has given us a clearer understanding of current processes and the key challenges staff face.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visiting and speaking with BSOs has given us a clearer understanding of current processes and the challenges staff face.  
```

I wonder if this might need a caveat around challenges staff face in arranging appointments?

I assume there might be more challenging things the staff face.
